The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy, presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz.
Daryl Lane and David Carson.
The following show will be an interview with Frederick Poe.
Poe knows science fiction as few other people do.
He's been an editor of science fiction books and magazines, an agent who's handled some of the biggest names in the field,
and an author who's won numerous Hugo and Nebula awards.
In fact, he's the only individual to be awarded a Hugo as an author and as an editor.
He began publishing science fiction in the late 1930s.
Perhaps his best known work is The Space Merchants, written in collaboration with Cyril Kornbluth.
The novel illustrates one of Poe's trademarks, satire and social criticism.
One of his more recent novels, Gateway, won both Hugo and Nebula awards.
In 1978, Poe published his memoirs, The Way the Future Was,
a fascinating description of his interface with science fiction through a long and uniquely vital career.
We can be grateful that his career is still alive and progressing.
The Space Merchants
Mr. Poe, you've written of how you grew up with science fiction,
reading the pulps, organizing clubs, editing fanzines and so forth.
Could you recall what it was that attracted you to science fiction so completely at such an early age?
Well, I think it was basically the adventure, the kind of science fiction that was being published around 1930,
when I first got in touch with it.
When I first discovered that it existed, it was mostly space opera and gimmick stories
and stories about exciting, adventurous exploits all over the galaxy.
And that was in the middle of the Great Depression,
and science fiction looked an awful lot better to me than the real world that I could see.
Okay, I believe your first story was published around 1937. Is that correct around that time?
The first thing I had published was a poem. It was an amazing story.
I wrote it in 1935, and it was accepted in 1936 and published in 1937 and paid for in 1938.
So somewhere in there I became a professional writer.
The first story, I think, was probably in 1938.
It was a collaboration with another writer, and it appeared in a astounding magazine that's now called Analog.
Could you explain just a little bit about what the Futurians were and your part in the organization?
Well, science fiction has some special traits, and one of them is that its readers herd together as much as they can.
They form fan clubs and associations and correspondents groups and so on.
And in New York City, there were quite a few science fiction fans, and about 25 or 30,
most of whom wanted to be writers, formed a club called the Futurians.
There were people like Cyril Karnbluth, Isaac Asimov, Damon Knight, and myself, quite a few others.
Don Walheim, who's now the head of Dahl Books as an editor, and no batches of others
who really desperately wanted to write science fiction or edit science fiction or something like that.
Quite a few of them acted out their childhood fantasies and did it.
And I'm not quite sure why the Futurians produced more science fiction writers than most of the other clubs.
It probably has something to do with size. New York had a bigger pool of talent to draw from.
The Los Angeles group also produced quite a few, including Ray Bradbury and Larry Niven and several others.
Did you help each other in your writing? Was it sort of a brotherhood kind of thing? Were you aided each other?
It was partly help and partly one-upmanship, putting each other down.
We did discuss each other's work a lot, and I guess in the process of criticizing it, there was a lot of help given.
I think the biggest factor that made it easier for a lot of us to go on with writing was just the knowledge with other people who were doing it.
And also the fact that we collaborated a lot. We remedied each other's deficiencies by writing, by collaborating on single stories.
And although most of the stories were not very good, we did learn something by seeing how other people would tackle the same subjects we were writing about.
You're uniquely qualified, I think, to comment on science fiction since you've seen it from so many perspectives as a fan, an author, an agent, an editor, and so forth.
You started the editing part of it when you were 19 years old, I think. Is that right?
I was lucky enough to fall into a job as a professional magazine editor when I was 19. I had asked an editor I knew because I'd been trying to sell him stories without success.
If he needed an assistant, and he was kind enough not to laugh out loud.
I didn't know at the time that not very many science fiction magazine editors could afford assistance.
But he mentioned to me another publishing company that was expanding and suggested I get a touch with them.
So I did. It was popular publications, one of the biggest pulp houses of the time.
And they were expanding, and they gave me a job at $10 a week to edit two professional science fiction magazines.
$10 wasn't so bad. They hired other editors for nothing at the same time.
And most of the material you got then was the pulp kind of stuff?
It was mostly pulp, but it included a lot of the writers who are the mainstays of the field now.
I published a lot of Isaac Asimov stuff because we were close friends.
A few of Robert A. Heinlein's stories that his primary market, John Campbell, for one reason or other, didn't want to print.
And Henry Kutner and A. E. Van Vot and Cleve Cartmille and Del Sprague de Camp.
Most of the people who were writing at that time wound up in my magazine, not always with their best stories.
In fact, very often with their worst stories, because I wasn't paying very much.
I had a budget of about half a cent a word.
One of the other lines of work that you got into, I remember, was as an advertising copywriter,
which brings up to my mind the novel The Space Merchants.
Well, actually The Space Merchants was sort of responsible for it.
When I was in the Army, in the Air Force, in World War II, I had some spare time on my hands in Italy.
And I decided to write a novel. And the most interesting subject I could think of was the advertising industry.
So I wrote a whole novel about advertising. Very bad novel.
After the war was over, I took it out and looked at it and realized that it was pretty bad.
And one of its great defects was that I didn't know anything about advertising.
So I went to the New York Sunday Times and looked in the classified section,
found a couple of people advertising jobs in advertising,
and applied and got one of them and spent about three years as an advertising copywriter.
During that time, I looked over at this old novel again and realized that it had many more faults and ignorance.
And I burned it and I had only basic information about advertising and no novel to put it in.
So I thought of writing a science fiction novel. And it turned out to be The Space Merchants.
Cyril Cornblith was a close friend of mine. We'd collaborated before the war, before we both went into service.
And after I had written about a third of it, because a magazine editor wanted it in a hurry,
I asked Cyril if he wanted to help me with it and he and I collaborated on it.
What was your normal method of collaboration? How did you work out your scenario for the future?
We didn't work them out in very great detail ahead of time.
Mostly what Cyril and I did was to, simply, we wrote seven novels and a number of short stories together.
Generally speaking, what we did after the war, after The Space Merchants and we began writing novels more often than short stories.
Cyril would come out to my house in Red Bank, New Jersey, where we kept the room for him with his own typewriter
and we'd sit around and talk for a while and discuss general areas we were interested in writing about, maybe some characters.
And then we'd flip a coin and the loser would go up to the third floor and write the first four pages.
And he'd come down and say, you're on, the other person would go up and write the next four pages.
And if you do that about 25 or 30 times, you have the rough draft of a complete novel.
Everything got radically rewritten after that because the rough draft was pretty rough but structurally it was all there.
Going back to The Space Merchants, there's one question I can never avoid asking an author.
I'm sure you get these all the time and not sure how you respond to them.
But regarding the ending of the novel, did you intend for that to be optimistic?
They were going to get a new start on Venus, maybe perhaps construct a better society.
Was that the intention there or did you leave it ambiguous?
I left it ambiguous partly because I wasn't feeling very positive at the time.
The novel was written in 1952 in their abouts, which was a pretty grimy period in the history of this country.
It was the McCarthy years and the Cold War years and things did not look too, they didn't look even as good as they do now as a matter of fact.
So I wasn't feeling optimistic. I didn't mean to foreclose the possibility of a happy ending.
Actually the novel had two endings. There was a different ending in the magazine here, more upbeat but less organically related to the rest of the novel.
It was put in at the insistence of the magazine editor.
Many readers of course have noticed a very strong social element in your work.
You have much to say about United States society and culture and so forth.
And I believe you've even been involved in politics.
Have you seen yourself in the role of a preacher or a moralist with warnings and science fiction as sort of a pulpit maybe or a soapbox sort of a thing to satirize with?
Oh sure, I think that every writer who really has any interest in what he's doing feels that he has something to say.
There's a remark, I don't remember the source of it, that the proper title of every book is really how to be more like me.
And I think that's how I think that writers are preachers and educators and polemicists and propagandists.
It isn't always political and it isn't always overt but if it isn't there the novel doesn't say anything.
My own interests have been fairly heavily social and political most of my life.
I was active as you mentioned in a lot of political things at one time or another.
I even wrote a book called Practical Politics which is sort of a how to do it manual of how to make the political apparatus work for whatever causes interest in it.
But I do not go out of my way to preach.
It just, I guess, colors everything I say because a lot of myself and as of every other writer I know goes into what I'm writing.
Do you think that science fiction has peculiar qualifications to act as a vehicle for social comment?
I think science fiction has special qualifications to act as a vehicle for discussing anything that affects the human being.
It's a way of looking at the human race from outside objectively.
It's a way of, it's a sort of game playing mechanism for seeing what would happen to human beings under conditions that haven't occurred yet but are very possible.
And I think that that's probably one of the strongest factors accounting for the continual growth in interest in science fiction that seems to have been going on as long as I've been alive.
Okay, in some of your recent works say, Jim and Man Plus, you describe some bad political systems I think where there's a lot of deception, selfish motives, war.
I think even in Jim that was annihilation of the earth.
Does that concentration on the bad aspects of society come from your view of the world?
No, I'm really Pollyanna. I'm a great optimist about the world. I think that we're in for some terrible times and I don't think that most of us will enjoy much of what happens in the next few years.
But I think in the long run the human race will straighten itself out and learn to be able to live better with each other.
But as far as writing, you know, of those concerns, it's not too interesting to write about a utopian.
I mean, what are you going to say about a bunch of people who walk around in togas and eat whole wheat bread, never have any bad thoughts.
It's much more interesting to paint the disasters that may occur as they sort of, I think it's Kingsley Amos who calls that kind of science fiction cautionary literature.
It's not saying what will happen, it's just warning what might happen if we don't watch out.
Okay, I'd like to ask the same question about Jim that I did about space merchants.
The ending of it. I took it as hopefully the part human, part alien society which you envision at the end of the book.
I took that as hopeful. Would I be misreading it?
No, I think that it's hopeful. I think that what I was trying to say in Jim was perhaps a little more over preaching than I usually intend.
And I'm not sure that it came across the way I intended it to.
But the subtitle of Jim is The Making of a Utopia.
And what I was trying to say in the novel is that you can't really plan a utopia.
You cannot construct a society that will make everybody happy and productive and glad to be alive.
Because the happiness, satisfaction, productivity are not a state, they're a process.
And no rigid system can survive giving people maximum opportunities to realize their potential without being flexible and changeable.
Okay, and then in Man Plus, what fascinated me about that book was your examination, the way you did it.
You examined machine intelligence.
Do you think that's going to be possible? The computers that you envision there are linking up and working to survive and sort of taking off?
I think it's an undecided question.
I'm not sure which, it's 50-50 chance in my opinion whether machine intelligence can ever develop the sort of independent self-defining goals that human beings can't.
But I don't think it's impossible. It's just that machines have not yet got that smart.
What I'm pretty sure of is that machines right now are doing things that 50 years ago one would have described as showing human intelligence.
They solve problems very well.
They even do creative things like composing music in any style you like or writing poetry.
It's true that the music and the poetry aren't very good, but most human-generated music and poetry is not very good either.
And I think that maybe better programs can be written for machines and they can be more creative.
But I think when that happens, people will simply redefine that activity as no longer a symptom of intelligence.
Okay, the cyborg that you mentioned in that book too. Do you think man will be partners with machine in that sort of way too?
First of all, I didn't make up the cyborg. The term and the concept was invented by two care-force or NASA.
I've forgotten which researchers in 1958 are about. And it's been used widely in a lot of places, but I didn't make it up.
I think that we already see cyborgs in the sense that a lot of people have mechanical parts keeping them alive.
Pacemakers and artificial plastic veins and arteries and so on.
Not to mention things like glass eyes and prosthetic limbs and false teeth and so on.
And I think we also see a sort of intellectual symbiosis like the cyborg in the link up between human beings and computers.
Computers do not solve problems, do not make up problems and solve them.
But they make it possible for human beings to do that sort of thing in a fraction of the time it used to take them.
Therefore they make the human beings effectively more intelligent than they were.
Okay, that leads me up to Gateway, which is one of my favorite books.
I think you've also written or said that it's one of your favorite novels.
Yeah, it's the novel that I cared most about. I'm not entirely pleased with anything I've written and I'm very displeased with a lot of what I've written.
But Gateway comes as close to being the way I would like it to be, as any novel I've ever written.
Now I think I noticed this. I'm sure many readers did too. In fact, you've commented on it.
There's a departure in style, I think, from your other work.
What were the influences that, well, both caused the idea of the book, perhaps, and also the different kind of style you used in it.
Well, one of the big things in Gateway was that I was under no pressure from anyone but myself to do it the way I thought it should be done.
I had my publisher at that time, a principal publisher, a man named Ian Valentine, who offered me a contract with a substantial advance to write a novel
without saying what the novel was going to be and without imposing any deadline on it when I had to deliver it.
So I didn't have to discuss it with an editor ahead of time or write an outline and limit myself to the opportunities I could take.
And I didn't have the pressure of getting it delivered at a specific date to make me rush it through.
And actually, it took me, I think, six years from the time I signed the contract until I delivered it.
And I had been mulling it over for several years before that.
All in all, I think the book was something like ten years in the gestation.
And also, it's not possible for a writer to produce at the same level all the time.
I don't know why. There are times when I write better than others.
I can't relate them to any outside influence or to my resolution to do well or anything like that.
I just know that sometimes it comes out better than other times.
And Gateway, I think, is one of the times that came out very well.
I wish I could say the same of all of my books.
Did you say the New Wave was an influence on the way you wrote that book, the so-called New Wave in science fiction?
The New Wave was an attempt, I guess, fifteen years ago or more of a number of writers to break away from the traditional kinds of science fiction.
In fact, most of them didn't want to call it science fiction anymore.
They wanted to call it speculative fiction or call it nothing at all.
And they were interested primarily in writing about inner space rather than outer space.
And secondarily, a lot of them, things like the drug culture and rock music and so on.
But in the rather bitter internal struggle that went on in science fiction,
a lot of people taking sides one way or the other.
I think everyone was deeply affected.
And the New Wave, if nothing else, taught a bunch of old dinosaurs like Asimov and Heinlein and me
that there were nontraditional ways of constructing a novel.
You see, most of us had grown up when science fiction was in the pulp magazines
and most of it was written according to some variant of a pulp formula.
It turned out that wasn't necessary.
And I think the New Wave is responsible for teaching us that.
When you were writing Gateway, when you conceived of the idea during that gestation period,
did you intend for there to be a sequel to it at that time?
No, I did not intend for there to be a sequel to it until it was published and people began telling me I ought to write a sequel.
That's what I was interested in.
In other words, were these fans, you responded to fan desires in that respect?
Largely to fan desires and also to my publisher who sat on me and insisted.
I wasn't too hard to convince, but I did not have any such plan.
I know that Gateway leaves a lot of questions unanswered and suggests a lot of things that are not made explicit in the novel.
And I did all that on purpose, but not for the sake of preparing a way for a sequel,
but just because I think that's the characteristic of a lot of good science fiction.
When you finish the story, you think of things that let you write your own stories after it.
I mean, that's the sort of thing that Arthur Clarke does very well.
And I think I try to do it whenever I can.
And it just turned out that there was a lot of public pressure to write a sequel.
There's also been public pressure to write another sequel, and I'm just about to sign a contract to do that,
but I swear I had no such intention when I finished Beyond the Blue Event or Rice.
That's what I was going to ask you.
There were still some questions about the Hishi that were open for exploration,
and I wondered if you'd considered another novel about them.
I've considered it, and just a few weeks ago,
I yielded the pressure from my publisher and said I would sign a contract for another book.
I don't plan to go on Beyond that.
I don't want to do Habit Castello Meet the Hishi or Habit and the Hishi go to Hawaii or whatever.
That's going to be the end of it as far as I'm concerned, but I will write one more.
So many authors are doing trilogies these days.
I thought that maybe you'd started out with that idea way back.
No, not me.
A lot of them do, and I kind of present it because I think mostly it's unfair to the reader to give them part of a story.
I don't think that's true about their gateway or Beyond the Blue.
I think they stand up by themselves.
Okay, I'd like to switch for just a few minutes to some questions about your time as an editor.
I think it was during the 60s you served as the editor of Galaxy in some of its satellite publications.
In probably the best science fiction of a decade went through you in that magazine, the best magazine science fiction.
I was interested in how much influence you had on the authors.
You know, your method of encouraging, coaxing, how you worked with them to get the material you did.
What's different with different authors?
The thing that I know best about how to be an editor is that you cannot have a general policy
and apply it to everybody in hope it will work in every case.
Because writers are very diverse human beings.
Some of them respond to long letters of criticism and suggestions and patting on the back or beating over the head.
And some of them do not want any outside influence at all.
One of my favorite writers told me early in our relationship that he was willing to have me buy some stories and reject others.
He didn't want to hear why.
I sent it back, just sent it back and say no and not tell him what I didn't like about it because I upset him.
Other writers wanted to know in great detail not only what I didn't like but what I did like.
And also there are some writers who are very responsive to money and some to whom money means nothing at all.
Not that they are immune to it but they don't want to think in those terms.
And there are some writers who respond to a lot of personal attention and some who really want to be left alone.
And I had to find out something about each writer to find out the best way to deal with them.
I can't say I was always successful either.
There are a number of writers that I think I should have been able to get more good material from and didn't.
And I just missed the combination in those cases.
An editor in that position, the kind of position you had, I would assume that a lot of stories get published because of the editor's help
and whatever kinds of encouragement he gives it would not have been published otherwise.
Quite a few, yeah, especially quite a few stories come to be written because an editor says,
listen you've got a notion here that you are throwing away and you really should expand it.
John Campbell was superb at that sort of thing.
Some of the best stories he published were the result of his telling a writer that he had an idea that he didn't realize he had
and then getting the writer to write it.
And I tried to do that as much as I could too.
But writers do not always know where their ideas come from and do not always know how to deal with outside suggestions.
There's one very good writer who always wanted to comment suggestions.
Who I finally decided I shouldn't ever give any to because the only thing he ever did was not to rewrite a story the way I suggested it,
but to throw it away and write a whole new one.
I was never able to get him to rewrite a line.
As a result there are probably ten or fifteen stories of his that will never be published because he just threw them away.
Hmm. I think IEF was one of the magazines you worked with when you were with Galaxy.
Galaxy and IEF and a couple of others.
Did you get Larry Niven's first story in that IEF magazine?
I published his first story which is a very short one and for which he got a very short paycheck and his next one was a little longer
and he got a little more and the next one was quite a lot longer and he got quite a lot more.
Larry said that if it hadn't been for those three events in that order he could not have gone on being a writer.
So I take some pride in the fact that I was instrumental in making it possible for him to devote his time to writing.
IEF
Frederick Poe has every reason to be proud.
He has either produced or helped produce some of the masterworks of science fiction.
Through being an editor he has helped discover and develop some of today's best writers.
Suggested works are Gateway and Man Plus by Frederick Poe
and The Space Merchants by Frederick Poe and Cyril Cornbluth.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane and David Carson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
in conjunction with KOCB FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show